---
layout: default
mathjax: true
title:  Sheet 6
date:   2018-12-04 08:33:19 +0100
categories: exercises 
---

## Sheet 6


### Task 1

PageRank is the algorithm that Google originally used to determine the
"importance" (or rank) of a web page.

> The idea for PageRank is this: Define a Markov chain that describes
> the behavior of a random web-surfer. Consider the stationary
> distribution of this Markov chain. Define the weight of a page to be
> the probability of that page in the stationary distribution.
> Higher-probability pages are considered better. So when the user
> submits a query consisting of a set of words, present the web pages
> containing these words, in descending order of probability.
>
> Conveniently, the PageRank vector (the stationary distribution) does
> not depend on any particular query, so it can be computed once and
> then used for all subsequent queries. (Of course, Google periodically
> recomputes it to take into account changes in the web.)

We start with a rudimentary Markov chain and we discover why it needs to
be improved.

a)  In each iteration, the random surfer selects an outgoing link from
    his current web page, and follows that link. (If the current web
    page has no outgoing link, the surfer stays stand.) We consider the
    small Web network of the picture, consisting of only four sites
    linked together as shown.

 
    Let $k{(j)}$ denote the number of links from page $j$ to other pages
    in the network. If $k{(j)}\neq 0 $ and no other knowledge about the
    relevance of the pages is given, then it is reasonable to assume
    that the surfer follows links from the current web page with
    probability:
    $$a_{ij}=\begin{cases}1/k{(j)} & \text{if there is a link from page $j$ to page
      $i$}\\
    0 & \text{otherwise}
    \end{cases}$$ Write the transition matrix $A_1$ of the Markov chain.

    According to this Markov chain, how likely is that the random surfer
    is at each page after many iterations? What are the most likely
    pages?

    Use the power method and carry out the operations in Python for the
    following cases:

    -   if it starts at page 2 and takes an even number of iterations

    -   if it starts at page 2 and takes an odd number of iterations

    -   if it starts at page 3 and takes an odd number of iterations

    You should find that the answer depends on where the surfer starts
    and how many steps he takes.

    The probabilities are almost the same except that the probabilities
    of 1 and 2 are swapped.

b)  From the point of view of computing definitive pageranks using the
    power method, there are two things wrong with this Markov chain:

    i.  There are multiple clusters in which the surfer gets stuck. One
        cluster is page 1 and page 2, and the other cluster is page 4.

    ii. There is a part of the Markov chain that induces periodic
        behavior: once the surfer enters the cluster page 1, page 2, the
        probability distribution changes in each iteration.

    The first property implies that there are multiple
    stationary distributions. The second property means that the power
    method might not converge. We want a Markov chain with a unique
    stationary distribution so we can use the stationary distribution as
    an assignment of importance weights to web pages. We also want to be
    able to compute it with the power method. We apparently cannot work
    with the Markov chain in which the surfer simply chooses a random
    outgoing link in each step.

    Consider then an alternative very simple Markov chain: the surfer
    jumps from whatever page he’s on to a page chosen uniformly
    at random.

    Write the transition matrix $A_2$ for this Markov chain. Is there a
    unique stationary distribution? Which one?

c)  As you may have discovered the latter Markov chain does not in any
    way reflect the structure of the Web network. Using the stationary
    distribution to assign weights would provide no information at all.

    Instead, we will use a mixture of these two Markov chains. That is,
    we will use the Markov chain whose transition matrix is
    $$A = 0.85A_1 +
      0.15A_2$$

    Show that the matrix $A$ is a *stochastic matrix*, that is, the sum
    of the entries in all columns is 1.

    The Markov chain corresponding to the matrix $A$ describes a surfer
    obeying the following rule:

    -   With probability 0.85, select one of the links from the current
        web page, and follow it.

    -   With probability 0.15, jump to a web page chosen uniformly
        at random. (This is called teleporting in the context
        of PageRank.)

    You can think of the second item as modeling the fact that sometimes
    the surfer gets bored with where he is. However, it plays a
    mathematically important role. The matrix $A$ is a positive matrix
    (every entry is positive). A theorem ensures that there is a unique
    stationary distribution, and that the power method will converge
    to it.

    Calculate how likely it is that the random surfer is at each page
    after many iterations and rank consequently the pages. You can use
    the theory of diagonalization or the power method and carry out the
    calculation with Python.



### Task 2


The file \texttt{top250movies.txt} contains data from the 250 top-rated
movies according to
IMDb.\footnote{\url{https://www.imdb.com/search/title?groups=top_250&sort=user_rating}}
Each line in the file lists a movie title and its cast as
\li{title/actor1/actor2/...}, with the actors listed mostly in billing
order (stars first), though some casts are listed alphabetically or in
order of appearance.

Create a `nx.DiGraph` object with a node for each actor in the file.
The weight from actor $a$ to actor $b$ should be the number of times
that actor $a$ and $b$ were in a movie together but actor $b$ was listed
first.  That is, *edges point to higher-billed actors* (see
Figure \ref{fig:pagerank-actor-network}).  Compute the PageRank values
of the actors and use your function from Problem
\ref{prob:pagerank-ranking} to rank them.  Return the list of ranked
actors.  \\(Hint: Consider using `itertools.combinations()` while
constructing the graph.  Also, use \li{encoding="utf-8"} as an argument
to \li{open()} to read the file, since several actors and actresses have
nonstandard characters in their names such as {\o} and {\ae}.)

% Since this dataset only includes popular movies, and since edges point
toward the stars of the movie, the PageRank vector can be seen as a way
to determine who the most visible actors in Hollywood are. 

With $\epsilon = 0.7$, the top three actors should be Leonardo DiCaprio,
Robert De Niro, and Tom Hanks, in that order.
