---
layout: default
mathjax: true
title:  "Exam guidelines"
date:   2018-05-10 09:33:19 +0100
categories: exam
---


The oral exam takes place on June 6, in [U59](https://clients.mapsindoors.com/sdu/573f26e4bc1f571b08094312/details/563cb927423b7d0540c9a4be/) from TBA.





When it is your turn for examination, you will draw one of the topics
listed below:

1. Set Cover

2. Traveling Salesman Problem

3. Knapsack and Bin packing

4. Scheduling: Approximation results

5. Scheduling: Heuristics

6. MaxSat


The examination lasts approximately 25 minutes. Your goal is to
convince the examiners and external examiner ("censor" in Danish) that
you have a thorough understanding of the topic.

You should start by presenting material related to the topic you
drew. Aim for a reasonably high pace and focus on the most interesting
material related to the question. You may bring a short list of keywords
for the exam to remember what you have decided to present. Thus, you are
not supposed to use note material, textbooks, transparencies, computer,
etc. for this part.

We, the examiners and the external examiner, will supplement with
specific questions when appropriate, and after a while, we will end the
discussion of the exam question that you drew and turn to material from
other parts of the curriculum. Finally, we will ask questions from your
handed in projects on heuristics. Resuming: 

* approx. 6 min presentation on the drawn topic
* approx. 6 min questions on the drawn topic
* approx. 6 min questions on another topic from the list 
* approx. 6 min discussion on the projects 

Note that the topics are generally quite broad. Hence, you must
select the material you choose to cover. It is often a good idea to
start with an overview of the most important parts of the topic and then
give a detailed treatment of one result. You will of course also be
evaluated based on your selection of material. If you only present the
simplest material, you limit the grade you can obtain. On the other
hand, a good presentation of the simple material is better than a poor
presentation of the harder material.


